
An objective comparison between CS:GO and Valorant.

Framework for comparison:

In this post, I'll be using two metrics to compare these two games: Skill floor, and skill ceiling.
The definition of both of these definitions is somewhat contested, so I'll be making up my own :p.

1. Skill Floor:
  The amount of knowledge or skill a player must have to use the mechanism effectively.
  Alternatively, in a fight between two good players, both of them are expected to possess this skill.
  Furthermore, the difference between them will NOT be determined because of this skill.

  E.G: Because of the ease of usage of smokes in Valorant, the skill floor for smokes is lower.
  E.G: Because of the introduction of agents in Valorant, you must know about every agent and their abilities in order to be a good player. Hence, the skill floor is higher.

2. Skill Ceiling:
  The amount of knowledge or skill that a player can possess *above the skill floor*.
  Alternatively, this refers to the maximum possible difference between the skill of two good players at using this mechanic.

  E.G: Because of the lower movement speed in Valorant, the operator has a lower skill ceiling.
  E.G: Because Valorant has info-gathering utility, the skill ceiling is higher.

3. Notable Effects:
  Several new mechanisms introduced in Valorant also create side-effects whose impact cannot be entirely captured by the above two metrics.
  a) Randomness:
        Valorant has a lot of randomness in it, and it is mostly considered to be a negative thing.
        While randomness can lead to exciting fights because everything is possible,
        it is generally unsatisfying to lose to a less-skilled player because of it.
        Randomness is a vital part of any game as it introduces asymmetry, but too much of it is definitely a bad thing.

  b) New Dimension:
        Because our baseline (CS:GO) is such a basic/pure game, we need to consider the impact of introducing entirely new dimensions into the game.
        While new dimensions are generally considered to be positive because of the possibility of skill difference they introduce,
        they also often diminish the impact of the existing dimensions (e.g. gunplay).


THE COMPARISON:

1. Smokes -
    Difference:
      a) Smokes are much more easier to use, and the need to remember lineups is extinguished.
      b) Smokes can be used globally, which can lead to using smokes for faking executes and denying info more effective.
    Skill Floor: Lower
    Skill Ceiling: Higher
      Some might contest that because smokes can be used globally, the strategic and temporal impact of smoke usage has decreased.
      I believe that this is a minor issue, and the overall impact is positive.

2. Recoil Pattern:
    Difference:
      a) The recoil, while following a loose pattern of direction, is much more random.
      b) Instead of recoil control being memory-based, the method of control is reactive.
    Skill Floor: Lower
      The skill floor is lower because time learning the recoil pattern is not required,
      and only the need to understand how to reactively control the spray is present.
    Skill Ceiling: Unchanged
      A possible argument is that the reactive spray control can lead to a difference in skill and hence raise the skill ceiling,
      but I believe that learning the mechanism is easy enough to make it almost a non-factor in high-level gunfights.
    Other Effects: Randomness, New Dimension
      It should also be noted that the developers can easily tweak the randomness of the spray,
      if they think an imbalance is present. As of now, most people consider the negatives to outweigh the positives.
